README.md, before:

# PAB1_Task_with_biotrainer

## Evoplay with Biotrainer Integration

This is the repository for the Bachelor's Degree Thesis/Project carried out during the 2023/24 Winter Semester by Selin Demirtürk.

It provides a modified version of [EvoPlay](https://github.com/melobio/EvoPlay)'s PAB1_GFP_task, which was first published in [Nature](https://www.nature.com/articles/s42256-023-00691-9). This version is integrated with the open-source tool [BioTrainer](https://github.com/sacdallago/biotrainer), simplifying the process of training machine learning models for biological applications. Its main purpose is to make the use of EvoPlay more accessible to individuals with little to no background in machine learning.

## Code and Models

This repository contains all the code developed for the thesis, as well as a link to the the raw results obtained and the trained and used models. Following is the code not implemented by the author and the neural networks used are referenced.

**Code:**

* **Base Code of the Task**. Obtained from the [official repository](https://github.com/melobio/EvoPlay/tree/main/code/PAB1_GFP_task), maintained by model's authors.
* **Biotrainer**. Obtained from the [official repository](https://github.com/sacdallago/biotrainer)

**Neural Networks:**

* **Predictor Neural Network**. Generated with the help of [Biotrainer](https://github.com/sacdallago/biotrainer) using a custom [config_file](https://github.com/selindemirtuerk/BachelorThesis-PAB1_Task_with_biotrainer/blob/main/oracle_training/config.yml)

* **Policy Value Neural Network**. Provided by [RostLab](https://www.cs.cit.tum.de/en/bio/home/)

## Usage

You will need to provide the path to your dataset and number of desired sequences in order to run the script. Supported file formats are .txt, .csv, .tsv

```bash
cd PAB1_GFP_Task_with_biotrainer/
python train_m_single_m_p_pab1.py /path/to/your/dataset number_of_sequences_to_generate name_of_output_directory

```
* **Example Usage**.

```bash
cd PAB1_GFP_Task_with_biotrainer/
python train_m_single_m_p_pab1.py /examples/data/PAB1.txt 10000 output
```

## Results

The pipeline produces a csv file containing the desired number of sequences and their respective scores, similar to the original EvoPlay PAB1-GFP-Task. Additionally, we provide a file highlighting the top 10 sequences generated during the execution, a graph depicting the evolutionary trajectory of the scores associated with the generated sequences, another graph contrasting the distribution of the scores of the generated sequences with those of the original dataset.

Commit message:

added .fasta processing to fasta_converter

README.md, after:

# PAB1_Task_with_biotrainer

## Evoplay with Biotrainer Integration

This is the repository for the Bachelor's Degree Thesis/Project carried out during the 2023/24 Winter Semester by Selin Demirtürk.

It provides a modified version of [EvoPlay](https://github.com/melobio/EvoPlay)'s PAB1_GFP_task, which was first published in [Nature](https://www.nature.com/articles/s42256-023-00691-9). This version is integrated with the open-source tool [BioTrainer](https://github.com/sacdallago/biotrainer), simplifying the process of training machine learning models for biological applications. Its main purpose is to make the use of EvoPlay more accessible to individuals with little to no background in machine learning. Here we focused solely on the PAB1-Task.

## Code and Models

This repository contains all the code developed for the thesis, as well as a link to the the raw results obtained and the trained and used models. Following is the code not implemented by the author and the neural networks used are referenced.

**Code:**

* **Base Code of the Task**. Obtained from the [official repository](https://github.com/melobio/EvoPlay/tree/main/code/PAB1_GFP_task), maintained by model's authors.
* **Biotrainer**. Obtained from the [official repository](https://github.com/sacdallago/biotrainer)

**Neural Networks:**

* **Predictor Neural Network**. Generated with the help of [Biotrainer](https://github.com/sacdallago/biotrainer) using a custom [config_file](https://github.com/selindemirtuerk/BachelorThesis-PAB1_Task_with_biotrainer/blob/main/oracle_training/config.yml)

* **Policy Value Neural Network**. Provided by [RostLab](https://www.cs.cit.tum.de/en/bio/home/)

## Usage

You will need to provide the path to your dataset and number of desired sequences in order to run the script. Supported file formats are .txt, .csv, .tsv and .fasta

```bash
cd PAB1_GFP_Task_with_biotrainer/
python train_m_single_m_p_pab1.py /path/to/your/dataset number_of_sequences_to_generate name_of_output_directory

```
* **Example Usage**.

```bash
cd PAB1_GFP_Task_with_biotrainer/
python train_m_single_m_p_pab1.py /examples/data/PAB1.txt 10000 output
```

## Results

The pipeline produces a csv file containing the desired number of sequences and their respective scores, similar to the original EvoPlay PAB1-GFP-Task. Additionally, we provide a file highlighting the top 10 sequences generated during the execution, a graph depicting the evolutionary trajectory of the scores associated with the generated sequences, another graph contrasting the distribution of the scores of the generated sequences with those of the original dataset.
